GWEN IFILL: Welcome to our "PBS
NewsHour"
special coverage of the
presidential caucuses
in Iowa. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff in Des
Moines in the capital city of
Des Moines on
the campus of Drake University,
as the caucus
results are all but almost
completely in,
and the shape of the
presidential race has
been changed.
GWEN IFILL: The people of Iowa
have kicked
off the presidential year
tonight with big
turnouts and big surprises.
On the Republican side, with
nearly all caucus
sites reporting, the Associated
Press projects
Ted Cruz has won, defeating
Donald Trump,
who led in public opinion polls
before today.
Marco Rubio ran a strong third,
nearly even
with Trump.
The Democratic race is still too
close to
call, with Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders
running almost dead even and
some sites yet
to report.
The Republicans are already
coming out to
assess their performances.
Donald Trump and
Marco Rubio spoke a short while
ago, separately.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We finished second. And I want
to tell you
something. I'm just honored. I'm
really honored.
And I want to congratulate Ted.
And I want
to congratulate all of the
incredible candidates,
including Mike Huckabee, who has
become a
really good friend of mine. So,
congratulations
to everybody.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
For months, they told us,
because we didn't
have the right endorsements or
the right political
connections, we had no chance.
They told me that we had no
chance because
my hair wasn't gray enough and
my boots were
too high.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: They told me I
needed to
wait my turn, that I needed to
wait in line.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: But, tonight,
tonight, here
in Iowa, the people of this
great state have
sent a very clear message. After
seven years
of Barack Obama, we are not
waiting any longer
to take our country back.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: The results in Iowa
have also
started to winnow the field.
Republican Mike
Huckabee tweeted a short while
ago that he
is dropping out. He won just 2
percent support
tonight.
And Democratic -- and Democrat
Martin O'Malley
announced he's suspending his
campaign after
garnering just 1 percent.
Judy joins us now from Des
Moines for a closer
look at what is behind the
results so far.
Judy, two interesting things in
those two
speeches. Marco Rubio, who came
in third,
looks like he came in -- gave a
speech like
he came in first. And Donald
Trump was very
subdued and brief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly, Gwen.
I was listening to Marco Rubio,
thinking,
if you didn't know what the
numbers were,
you would think that he was the
first-place
finisher, rather than the
third-place finisher.
We don't have the final numbers
yet from Republicans,
but Marco Rubio clearly believes
he's riding
something important out of Iowa.
He has come in first among the
so called establishment
candidates. He's not the
outsider that Donald
Trump and Ted Cruz were
portrayed as being.
And there's no question, after
listening to
Rubio tonight and talking to
people in his
campaign, that they plan to take
that to New
Hampshire, to South Carolina and
beyond, and
try to claim that mantle and
pick up the support
of people who were looking at
other establishment
Republicans.
GWEN IFILL: You know, Judy, one
of the things
that you did tonight was go
visit a couple
of caucuses where there was a
lot of turnout.
But it turns out that turnout
wasn't necessarily
for the outsiders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, exactly
right.
And in the case of Donald Trump,
the Iowa
poll, the vaunted Iowa poll had
forecast that
he would likely come in first on
the strength
of that outsider appeal, the man
who had never
run for public office before.
It's clear that
Donald Trump did something
special in this
race. He shook things up in a
way that we
haven't seen American politics
shaken up.
I think Ted Cruz can attribute
some of the
energy in his campaign, and so
can the other
candidates, to what Donald Trump
brought.
But, in the end, what Donald
Trump wanted
clearly was a victory. He had
members of his
family today predicting he would
come in first.
He didn't do that.
And, right now, he's very close
to third place
-- to Marco Rubio, who is coming
in third.
So, we still have to see that
Donald Trump
coming in second.
GWEN IFILL: Among the Democrats,
this is still
too close to call, last we
checked. Do we
-- have we heard anything from
either the
Sanders or the Clinton campaign
that tells
us what they think is going on?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the Clinton
camp was
starting to talk to reporters,
Gwen, a little
while ago and saying or
suggesting that they
thought Hillary Clinton had won.
That -- they have backed off of
that. And
at least the last numbers I saw,
they were
within two-tenths of a
percentage point apart.
She was at 49.8. He was at 49.6.
There may
be new numbers since then. But
that's clearly
not the margin of victory that
Hillary Clinton
wanted to ride out of Iowa.
And it is a far cry from what
the Clinton
camp had just a few months ago.
Her -- her
-- or, I should say, Bernie
Sanders' support
has climbed steadily since he
started putting
so much effort and energy into
this state.
And I would say that that must
give her campaign
a lot of headaches to go to
sleep on tonight,
if they get any sleep at all.
GWEN IFILL: One less headache --
Judy, we
will be back with you in a few.
One less headache for them is,
as we heard
earlier, Iowa marks the end of
the road for
some tonight.
Democrat Martin O'Malley spoke
this evening
in Des Moines after suspending
his long-shot
campaign.
MARTIN O'MALLEY (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Words cannot express how
grateful I am to
all of you, my true friends, who
have helped
me in waging this courageous
battle.
When I got into this eight
months ago, I had
no doubt that it would be
anything but a tough
fight. And it is a tough fight.
But I have
always been drawn to a tough
fight. And I
felt, when I got into this, as I
looked down
the road, I felt very firmly
that our country
was scanning the horizon,
looking for new
possibilities and new leadership
and a way
to heal our divisions and move
us forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm joined
now about Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report.
So, Amy, we have got something
to talk about.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: We
have a lot.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We have got -- we
have got
real numbers, real results.
They're not final
in these contests.
AMY WALTER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have
already got Ted
Cruz declaring victory on the
Republican side.
But let's talk about the
Democrats first.
AMY WALTER: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: O'Malley dropping
out, suspending
his campaign. And look at how
close it is
between Clinton and Sanders.
AMY WALTER: Well, the
conventional wisdom
going into this race was that
higher turnout
helps Sanders and helps Trump.
It's clearly helping Sanders. It
wasn't enough
to help Trump. One thing is, I'm
trying to
dig through a lot of these
entrance polls,
is to look for, what were some
signs for why
Sanders is doing so well?
The turnout among young people
wasn't as high
as it was back in 2008, when
Barack Obama
turned all those young people
out. But the
margin was huge. If these
entrances polls
are right, he got something like
48 percent,
Sanders did, among young people.
That is much
higher than Obama, who got
something like
60 percent.
So, I think what you're seeing
is, the numbers
might not translate, but the
enthusiasm was
strong enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what I was
hearing from
pollsters was that the support
-- and this
is really what you are saying --
the support
that Sanders is getting from
young people
was overwhelming the support
that Hillary
Clinton was getting from women.
AMY WALTER: Yes. That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She was counting
on women.
She was counting on younger
women.
AMY WALTER: She was counting on
women and
older voters.
And more older voters turned out
in this election,
people over the age of 65, than
turned out
than in 2008, but they didn't
give her the
same margins that they -- that
the young people
gave to Bernie Sanders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk about
what happened
-- what is happening on the
Republican side.
It is true what Donald Trump
said. When he
came into Iowa, it wasn't
assumed this was
his kind of place.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, in the last
few weeks
and months, he's climbed in the
polls. And,
yes, he was overtaken by Ted
Cruz, but there
was a sense going into tonight
that Donald
Trump would do very well. He was
forecast
first in the highly respected
Iowa poll.
AMY WALTER: Right. He had gone
sort of up
and down through the polls in
the last few
months, where he was a little
bit ahead, a
little bit behind. If he
finishes in second,
then he would be somewhere in
that polling
average.
Look, I think, with Donald
Trump, I think
your point is correct, that he
energized clearly
a whole new group of people to
come out and
vote and participate in this
process. We also
saw that he got support among
all different
kinds of groups, including
evangelicals. He
did pretty well, considering
that he is not
from that traditional lane and
didn't campaign
as an evangelical.
The other interesting thing I
noticed in the
exit polls, or entrance polls,
as they call
them here, because they get
people before
they go in.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On their way in,
right.
AMY WALTER: Yes, is that what
you found was
that more people said -- barely,
though -- said
that they wanted somebody who
was new, wasn't
experienced; 49 percent picked
that.
But 45 percent said they want an
experience
candidate. Of the 45 percent who
said they
wanted an experienced candidate,
3 percent
gave Trump their vote, and 39
percent gave
it to Rubio, Cruz right behind
him on that.
So, there were more people that
turned out,
but a lot of people who turned
out were looking
for somebody that wasn't
necessarily in the
Trump mold.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And...
AMY WALTER: So, that is why this
turnout didn't
necessarily translate for Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well -- and
exactly. And so
the shaking up or the energy
that Trump brought,
some of it hurt him. It caused
people to think
harder about the race...
AMY WALTER: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... but say, I
don't want Donald
Trump going in.
Just very quickly, Amy, what
does Marco Rubio
do coming out of Iowa?
AMY WALTER: Well, as you said,
he positioned
himself as the winner, and goes
into New Hampshire
saying, I am the candidate.
Forget about Bush,
forget about Kasich. I'm the
only person that
can be the true non-Trump,
non-Cruz candidate,
the only one who can win the
Electoral College
as it's currently set up.
And we will see. But Trump still
has a pretty
strong lead, if we believe
polling now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At least he did
in the last
poll.
AMY WALTER: He did have a very
strong lead
in New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
AMY WALTER: And it's going to be
critical
for Rubio to be able to come out
of New Hampshire
saying that I have won
something.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And then there is
John Kasich.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter, we
thank you.
AMY WALTER: Thanks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will see
you back in
D.C.
AMY WALTER: Indeed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Judy.
Now we want to dig into the
numbers a little
bit, going beyond the results
for key facts
about the Iowans who are kicking
off this
election season.
Hari Sreenivasan breaks it down
-- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Thanks, Gwen.
Our data team looked to see
Iowa's track record
in picking winners and how
similar Iowans
are to the rest of the country.
The caucuses
are far from a perfect predictor
of who goes
on to become the party's nominee
or eventually
to the White House.
In fact, for Democrats, it is
slightly better
than flipping a coin. The
caucuses have picked
the candidate correctly 55
percent of the
time. For Republicans, the
process has only
been right 43 percent of the
time.
For example, in 1992,
three-quarters of Iowa
Democrats stood behind longtime
Iowa Senator
Tom Harkin. That year, Bill
Clinton only received
3 percent of the votes, but
later went on
to serve two terms as president.
We do have better indicators
today to which
candidate has been on the minds
of Iowans
in the week leading up to
tonight. Over the
last week, Facebook users in
Iowa had more
to say about Donald Trump than
any other presidential
candidate, Republican or
Democrat. You saw
that same trend nationwide.
Behind Trump on
the Republican side were Ted
Cruz, Marco Rubio,
and Ben Carson. And among
Democrats, Iowans
had the most to say about
Hillary Clinton,
followed by Bernie Sanders and
then Martin
O'Malley.
Of the issues that most
concerned Iowans on
Facebook, crime and criminal
justice, abortion,
taxes and the Affordable Care
Act, there was
only one topic the rest of the
country was
talking about. That's Wall
Street and financial
regulation. According to
Facebook, the rest
of the nation is also talking
about topics
including religion, racism and
discrimination,
jobs and Benghazi.
But who are today's Iowans, and
how do they
compare to the rest of the
country? They register
to vote slightly more than the
rest of the
nation. In 2012, three out of
four Iowans
were registered, vs. two out of
three Americans.
Among Iowans 18 or older, the
state's median
household income is $53,712,
almost exactly
the national average.
And the poverty rate, 11
percent, is also
similar the rest of the United
States. But
there is a significant
difference. And that's
race. According to the census,
about nine
out of 10 Iowans are white.
Nationwide, that
number is far lower, about
two-thirds. Fewer
Latino and African-American
voters call Iowa
home, compared to the rest of
the nation.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Hari.
And now to the analysis of
Brooks and Cottle.
That is Michelle Cottle of "The
Atlantic"
and David Brooks, columnist with
The New York
Times. Mark Shields has been
under the weather,
but we look forward to his full
recovery and
his return to our campaign
coverage very soon.
So, David, I asked you at 6:00,
at our earlier
program, what was the difference
between emotion
and organization? Now that we
know that Ted
Cruz has won, that Marco Rubio
has said he
has won, essentially, and that
Donald Trump
has kind of slung off to New
Hampshire, saying
he will revisit this whole
thing, what do
you think won, organization or
passion?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I guess it
was organization.
It certainly wasn't Donald
Trump.
I think the big story of the
night is that
Donald Trump underperformed. He
underperformed
because he's been a show
business candidate.
And we were always curious -- we
were curious
to see if the show business were
turn into
substance. But, like a lot of
spectacle, it
was more flash than substance.
And I think we can expect that
in the states
ahead. There is no reason to
think why his
supporters would come out to
vote anymore
in New Hampshire or anywhere
else. So, I think
-- I don't know if he will lose
New Hampshire,
but I think we can expect some
underperformance.
The second thing we learned on
the Republican
side is that history has not
been suspended.
This looks a little -- a lot
more normal than
it did before tonight. We have
got a conservative
candidate. We have got Ted Cruz,
who looks
-- who inherited a lot of that
Rick Santorum,
Mike Huckabee vote, who won the
previous two
caucuses. He is obviously
stronger than they
going forward.
But he looks like the
conservative candidates
Iowans traditionally like. Marco
Rubio looks
like the one candidate who can
unify. This
is clearly his moment. A
panicked Republican
establishment is now going to
turn their face
to him. The question for Rubio
is, can he
acknowledge the Trump phenomenon
and reach
out to those people and be the
one who can
unify the party?
GWEN IFILL: How about
overperformed -- or
who overperformed and who
underperformed tonight,
Michelle?
MICHELLE COTTLE: I think Rubio
actually did
a pretty good job of beating the
expectations
game.
And I know it's late, but if you
listen closely,
you can hear the Republican
establishment
gearing up to just rally around
him and push
him through.
GWEN IFILL: You can hear the
wind of relief?
MICHELLE COTTLE: That's right.
You can hear
the sigh of relief going out.
And David's right. Ted Cruz will
declare victory,
but this turns into a vastly
more conventional
Iowa caucus. You have the social
conservative
who came out on top. And then,
you know, you
go from there. And they will go
into New Hampshire,
and we will just kind of see how
it shakes
out. But Trump missed his moment
with this.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's talk a
little bit
about the Democratic side,
because that is
still truly up in the air, as
far as we can
tell, David.
Bernie Sanders, if you listen to
what Amy
Walter was just telling us,
really has found
a way to at least nip at the
heels of Hillary
Clinton tonight. We don't know
how it's going
to turn out yet, but it's not
insignificant.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. At this
moment, we don't
know who will win, but we do
know that Bernie
Sanders can turn out his people.
And that
was also the question, because
he had a lot
of first-time voters, he had a
lot of younger
voters.
They had to spread around the
state to go
to the key districts. And they
did that. And
so Bernie Sanders, A, looks like
a lot better
executive and organizer than
Donald Trump
on the Republican side, because
he turned
his people out. And so, as we go
forward,
again, Iowa, New Hampshire,
Vermont were his
three best states.
So, we can -- it is not like it
is a cakewalk
for Bernie Sanders, but he has
proven to be
a potent force, and Hillary
Clinton looks
still the dominant favorite, but
a lot more
vulnerable than she did a few
hours ago.
GWEN IFILL: You know, Michelle,
one of the
things we know for sure about
Iowa, it lends
itself to interpretation.
So, in the same way that we had
Marco Rubio
acting like he won tonight, even
though he
came in third, we still know
that, no matter
what this -- how this turns out
between Bernie
Sanders and Hillary Clinton,
both of them
can say they did OK.
MICHELLE COTTLE: They can. And I
think, unfortunately,
for the Clinton campaign, there
is the narrative
of, uh-oh, deja vu, she was the
inevitable
going in, and it has happened
again.
And she's going to have to
survive a news
cycle of that as they go into
New Hampshire,
whereas Sanders was considered a
joke until
not that long ago. And now he
can declare
victory, irregardless of who
actually comes
out on top.
GWEN IFILL: Is Bernie Sanders --
let me stick
with you for a moment. Is Bernie
Sanders'
ability to rise above the joke
factor, as
you put it, is it a result of an
anti-Hillary
feeling out there in the party,
or is it a
sense that he is actually a
legitimate and
viable future president of the
United States
for a lot of people?
MICHELLE COTTLE: I don't know
that it's anti-Hillary
feeling, so much as kind of anti
the way things
have -- you know,
anti-establishment, which
we're seeing a lot of places.
As for whether or not he is a
viable candidate
nationwide, we have to go back
to what we
were talking about earlier,
which is that
his three best states are
Vermont, New Hampshire
and Iowa, in terms of who his
base is. And,
again, it's the Democratic
primary. He's going
to have to prove that he can
talk to minority
voters and non-liberals before
he's going
to be able to make real inroads
into anything
past New Hampshire.
GWEN IFILL: And South Carolina,
of course,
is the first big test of that
diversity question.
MICHELLE COTTLE: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: David, did -- did
Marco Rubio
and did Ted Cruz especially
prove tonight
that you can take on Donald
Trump and live
to tell the tale?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, I don't know
if I would
give them credit for that,
because they didn't
run ads against him barely.
I think Trump sacrificed his
own. He has defeated
himself. And, frankly, I thought
his concession
speech was a little delusional.
It was fine.
It was nice. But he didn't
acknowledge the
defeat. And his is a campaign
that -- where
success has been built on
success. He claims
he's in the campaign because
he's a winner.
But now is he not a winner, so
how does he
justify the campaign?
So, I think it was more
self-immolation. But
Cruz is a strong candidate. One
of the reasons
he and Sanders are strong is, as
polls have
shown all year, the parties are
polarizing.
The number of people who call
themselves extremely
progressive is up. The number of
people who
call themselves extremely
conservative is
up.
And so Cruz and Sanders are
stronger than
their earlier versions, the
Santorums or the
Howard Deans, and so they
benefit from the
polarization of the country.
They are closer
to the heart of where their
parties are than
would have been the case five,
10 years ago.
GWEN IFILL: And, briefly, a word
for the exiting
candidates tonight, Martin
O'Malley on the
Democratic side, Mike Huckabee
on the Republican
side. Does their exit make any
difference?
Or did their presence make a
(LAUGHTER)
MICHELLE COTTLE: You know, I was
in Iowa with
Martin O'Malley over the summer
a little bit.
And there were a lot of Sanders
voters at
the O'Malley events. So, it's
not like he
was...
GWEN IFILL: He had traction of
his own.
MICHELLE COTTLE: He wasn't
electrifying a
lot of the voters there. So, I
doubt his exit
is going to make much of an
issue.
GWEN IFILL: And in addition to
Mike Huckabee's
withdrawal tonight, David, we
have Ben Carson
saying he is taking a break from
the campaign
to go get some fresh clothes.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. You know,
they do have
laundries. They do have washing
machines in
these places.
Yes. I -- these are -- we're
going to see
the campaign not narrow
immediately, but I
think some of these nice guys
who are genuinely
good guys are going to drop out.
It's sort
of amazing that Huckabee and
Santorum, the
two previous winners, basically
registered
very little, a lot of fickleness
there, in
part because other -- other
forces have just
come in and displaced them. I'm
not sure their
departure will mean much.
GWEN IFILL: David Brooks joining
us from New
Haven tonight, Michelle Cottle
with me here
in Washington, thank you both
very much.
And now I'm joined by Lisa
Desjardins, who
will take us a little bit deeper
into what
these numbers tell us, and
especially who
voted and where.
LISA DESJARDINS: Fascinating
things we're
seeing on the maps tonight.
I want to go straight to the
Republican race,
where we have Ted Cruz coming
out on top.
If you look at the map of Iowa
and you look
at the numbers that we have from
the race
tonight, look at these key areas
we talked
about before.
That upper northwest corner, the
conservative
corner, Ted Cruz did win there,
but I think
what is notable, Gwen, Marco
Rubio did well
up there as well.
Look at Des Moines. Here is
where Marco Rubio
really soared. He won two of the
hugest counties
in Iowa. So, those numbers are
really what
pushed him up to number three.
Trump, where did he do well. He
did well sort
of on the corners, around the
sides. And I
compared this to past races. He
did well in
counties that just barely went
for John McCain,
sort of a strange moderate, warm
Republican
area.
Hard to say what generated that.
But I do
think what we see from these
numbers is, this
looks like what three-man races
look like.
It's interesting.
GWEN IFILL: Wow.
Is this what -- do these numbers
also explain
why things are still so tight as
a ticket,
as Dan Rather used to say, among
the Democrats?
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
And I think what we're seeing at
this exact
second are the important numbers
from the
bigger counties coming in that
will determine
this. Let's look at the
Democratic map, and,
in particular, want to see that
those university
towns we have been talking about
all night,
they didn't all go for Bernie
Sanders to the
degree that he wanted.
We saw a couple went 60/40, but
look at the
University of Northern Iowa,
Black Hawk County.
That is a deep blue county, went
heavily for
President Obama in the general
election. Tonight,
Bernie Sanders is winning that
county by just
four points or so.
That's a place where he was
expected to just
cream Hillary Clinton. Not
happening. Now,
is that because she
out-organized him? Is
it because somehow she generated
some electricity
in that county? It's hard to
say. But when
you look at where she's winning
across the
board, not just college towns,
it's everywhere,
Gwen. It's not one type of
county or another.
And, to me, that says that is
someone who
is well-organized.
GWEN IFILL: I wonder if the map
begins to
fall apart in some of the
conventional wisdom
about Iowa as well, because the
Obama coalition
doesn't exactly exist anymore,
for instance.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And that is what I like about
these maps.
I think we are seeing a
completely new way
of looking at Iowa, completely
new way for
candidates to approach it. Sure,
you can do
as well as Marco Rubio did by
taking care
of Des Moines, doing well there.
But I think the successful
candidates tonight,
especially Ted Cruz, organized
everywhere,
got out their people everywhere,
and didn't
play this game of sort of
sectional voters
as much as we have seen in the
past.
GWEN IFILL: So, that cliche did
pay off, which
is, organization, organization,
organization
does pay off in Iowa for these
caucuses.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes. I think
that's right,
and also maybe the cliche of
three tickets
out of Iowa for the Republicans,
at least,
not three tickets for Democrats,
but...
GWEN IFILL: That's because the
third was so
far down.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
GWEN IFILL: Otherwise, maybe
there would have
been.
OK. It's fascinating to watch,
fascinating
to understand why. And thank you
so much.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
GWEN IFILL: Judy, we're back
with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hi, Gwen.
You know, as I'm listening to
these conversations
you're having with Lisa and with
David and
Michelle Cottle, I'm thinking
Iowa is often
derided for having these
caucuses. They're
kind of a strange animal when it
comes to
our political process. But, once
again, Iowa
has reshaped this president -- a
presidential
contest.
Look on the Republican side. Ted
Cruz, someone
who has had a -- already a
controversial career
in the Senate, is coming out of
here with
a clear win. And unlike the last
two elections,
when you had Mike Huckabee, Rick
Santorum
as the Republican winner, Ted
Cruz is someone
who has the ability to go on. He
has raised
money. He has proven his
organization statewide.
He can go on and do something
with this win
out of Iowa.
And on the Democratic side, you
have been
talking about it. This is a
state that put
the fear of God into Hillary
Clinton. She
came into the state thinking
this was going
to be a place she could not
easily take, because
she struggled here in 2008
against Barack
Obama, but never in their
wildest imagination
did they think they were going
to face the
kind of thing that Bernie
Sanders put together.
It's really something. When you
look -- I
looked at some numbers just
before we came
out here tonight. Bernie Sanders
did very
well across this state. There is
a lot of
excitement -- we talked about it
with Amy
Walter -- across the board,
ages, young, old,
demographics up and down.
And this is for, as we said, a
Democratic
socialist in the United States
Senate, so
a lot of surprise on the
Democratic side.
We're still watching those final
numbers to
see that Hillary Clinton pulls
it out, but,
boy, it sure has -- has kept us
on our toes.
GWEN IFILL: Sure has, Judy.
And thanks for all of your
reporting out there
in Iowa. It has been amazing.
Now we have Senator Ted Cruz,
the Republican
winner tonight. He spoke to
supporters moments
ago.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Tonight, the state of Iowa has
spoken.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. TED CRUZ: Iowa has sent
notice that the
Republican nominee and the next
president
of the United States will not be
chosen by
the media.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. TED CRUZ: Will not be
chosen by the Washington
establishment.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE).
SEN. TED CRUZ: Will not be
chosen by the lobbyists.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
SEN. TED CRUZ: But will be
chosen by the most
incredible, powerful force,
where all sovereignty
resides in our nation, by we,
the people,
the American people.
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: So, recapping the
headlines of
this presidential caucus night
in Iowa, Ted
Cruz bested Donald Trump in the
Republican
race, with Marco Rubio a close
third. Cruz
said his win shows the strength
of conservatives
against Washington insiders.
Good night, Judy, from Iowa.
Thanks for joining us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That wraps up our
coverage
from here. We will see you
later.
I'm Judy Woodruff. Good night.